Title: SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.24235v1

Published Time: Wed, 24 Jun 2026 00:42:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

Yucheng Yuan 1 * Yuanfeng Ji 2 * Zhongxiao Li 2 Ruijiang Li 2

# Abstract 

Spatial proteomics enables single-cell-resolution characterization of protein expression within tis-sue architecture, playing a critical role in under-standing tumor microenvironments and guiding precision medicine. However, current analysis workflows remain fragmented, requiring expert manual orchestration of heterogeneous tools and limiting research scalability and reproducibility. We present SP-Mind, the first autonomous AI agent designed to unify the spatial proteomics analysis pipeline, from raw multiplexed tissue imaging to downstream phenotype discovery. Equipped with expert-curated biological analy-sis skills and specialized computational tools, SP-Mind converts natural-language queries into end-to-end analytical workflows without task-specific fine-tuning. To rigorously evaluate its capabilities, we introduce SP-Bench, a comprehensive bench-mark spanning diverse tissue types, comprising 102 tasks across 18 distinct categories. Through extensive evaluation on SP-Bench and established downstream tasks, SP-Mind achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to existing open-source biomedical agent baselines. 

# 1. Introduction 

Recent advances in multiplexed tissue imaging enable the simultaneous detection of dozens of proteins at single-cell resolution (Goltsev et al., 2018; Giesen et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2018). This reveals the “molecular sociology” of tis-sues: how diverse cell types spatially organize, interact, and collectively shape disease outcomes (Bodenmiller, 2024; Bussi & Keren, 2024). Such insights are critical for preci-sion oncology and immunotherapy (Quail & Walsh, 2024). 

> *

Equal contribution 1Department of Computer Science, Stan-ford University, Stanford, USA 2Department of Radiation On-cology, Stanford University, Stanford, USA. Correspondence to: Ruijiang Li <rli2@stanford.edu >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). 

Extracting such insights requires a multi-stage computa-tional pipeline: image registration, artifact correction, cell segmentation, marker quantification, phenotyping, and spa-tial analysis (Bussi & Keren, 2024). Manually orchestrat-ing these stages is prone to errors and impractical at scale. Recent computational pipelines have integrated platform-specific tools (e.g., for CODEX, IMC) into end-to-end work-flows, enabling reproducible batch processing (Schapiro et al., 2022; Magness et al., 2024; Buckup et al., 2025). However, two fundamental limitations remain (Bussi & Keren, 2024): (a) Expert-dependent configuration: users must manually select tools and tune parameters based on imaging platform and tissue context; (b) Static execution: these systems cannot dynamically adapt to diverse analytical queries. Given these challenges, a pivotal question arises: 

Can we build an autonomous agent that understands user intent, selects appropriate tools and configurations, and executes end-to-end spatial proteomics analysis? 

In this paper, we introduce SP-Mind to address this question. SP-Mind is an autonomous reasoning agent equipped with two core components: (1) a modular library of 10+ spe-cialized tools covering the full spatial proteomics pipeline, from image preprocessing to spatial analysis; (2) expert-curated skill templates that encode domain knowledge for tool selection and parameter configuration. Beyond these, SP-Mind employs a ReAct-style reasoning loop that itera-tively observes execution outputs, diagnoses failures, and self-corrects. A single natural-language query triggers SP-Mind to automatically chain tools, complete the analysis, and deliver interpretable results. To rigorously evaluate agentic spatial proteomics analysis, we introduce SP-Bench, a comprehensive benchmark com-prising 102 tasks across 18 categories and 4 difficulty tiers. On SP-Bench, SP-Mind achieves 68.9% execution accu-racy, outperforming the strongest baseline by 13 percentage points. We further validate SP-Mind on downstream tasks including cell quantification and annotation, demonstrating consistent improvements over existing approaches. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We systematically define and formalize the problem of automated spatial proteomics analysis for the first time, and we present SP-Mind, the first autonomous 1  

> arXiv:2606.24235v1 [cs.AI] 23 Jun 2026 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis
> Figure 1. The SP-Mind Framework and Performance Evaluation. A brief illustration of spatial proteomics workflow and SP-Mind architecture (Left and Center). Benchmarking results on SP-Bench, fine-grained quantification, and cell annotation demonstrate SP-Mind’s state-of-the-art performance compared to baseline agents (Right).

AI agent for end-to-end spatial proteomics analysis, equipped with specialized tools and expert-curated skill templates, to address this problem. • We introduce SP-Bench, the first comprehensive stan-dardized benchmark for evaluating agentic spatial pro-teomics workflows. • We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on SP-Bench and downstream tasks, with extensive ablations validating the effectiveness of our design choices. 

# 2. Related Work 

Spatial Proteomics Workflows Spatial proteomics has tremendous medical potential. However, this translation of raw multiplexed imaging data into biological insight requires a complex, multi-stage computational workflow in-volving signal calibration (Peng et al., 2017), high-precision image registration (Muhlich et al., 2022), cell segmentation (Yapp et al., 2022), and phenotypic quantification/classifica-tion (Bussi & Keren, 2024). To manage this complexity, the field has initiated automation approaches that encapsulate in-dividual processing stages into containerized environments (Boettiger, 2015) orchestrated by workflow management systems like Nextflow (Di Tommaso et al., 2017). MCMI-CRO (Schapiro et al., 2022), TRACERx-PHLEX (Magness et al., 2024), and MARQO (Buckup et al., 2025) exem-plify this paradigm, providing an end-to-end pipeline that chains established spatial proteomics and downstream anal-ysis tools. While these frameworks excel at throughput and reproducibility, they suffer from inherent procedural rigidity, lacking the “adaptive intelligence” required to handle the heterogeneity of biological tissues and real-world analysis demands Bussi & Keren (2024). 

Biomedical AI Agents The emergence of AI agents built upon Large Language Models (LLMs) has fundamentally transformed autonomous reasoning, planning, and tool uti-lization. Foundational frameworks such as ReAct (Yao et al., 2022), CodeAct (Wang et al., 2024b), and AutoGen (Wu et al., 2024), alongside recent surveys (Xi et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024a), have codified a standardized agentic architecture comprising three core components: (1) data-oriented observation, (2) LLM-driven reasoning, and (3) code-based action execution. In the biomedical domain, this paradigm has been adapted to create specialized “AI Scientists.” (Gao et al., 2024; Qi et al., 2026) Works such as SciAgents (Ghafarollahi & Buehler, 2025), BioDiscov-eryAgent (Roohani et al., 2024), CRISPR-GPT (Qu et al., 2026), and GeneGPT (Jin et al., 2024) exemplify this by automating highly domain-specific workflows. More re-cent approaches have pursued a broader scope, with Biomni (Huang et al., 2025) and ToolUniverse (Gao et al., 2025) pio-neering general-purpose biomedical AI assistants. However, despite these advances, a critical gap remains: no existing biomedical agent is capable of orchestrating the end-to-end spatial proteomics analysis pipeline. 

Agent Benchmarks The rapid proliferation of au-tonomous agents has necessitated rigorous evaluation frame-works to measure reasoning and tool-use capabilities. In the general domain, benchmarks such as SWE-Bench (Jimenez et al., 2023), GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023), AgentBench (Liu et al., 2023) MMAU (Sakshi et al., 2024), and ToolBench (Qin et al., 2023) have established the gold standard for cod-ing, assessing multi-step planning, and generic API interac-tion. Parallel efforts have emerged within the biomedical sciences to evaluate domain-specific competence, exempli-fied by SciBench (Wang et al., 2023), LAB-Bench (Laurent 2SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

et al., 2024), BixBench (Mitchener et al., 2025) for scientific problem solving and MedAgentBench (Jiang et al., 2025) for clinical decision-making. However, existing benchmarks exhibit a significant blind spot regarding complex spatial bi-ology workflows. To date, no benchmark exists that targets the holistic spatial proteomics analysis workflow. 

# 3. SP-Mind Agent 

We present SP-Mind, an LLM-driven reasoning agent for end-to-end spatial proteomics analysis. Given a user query describing an analytical objective (such as cell segmen-tation, marker quantification, or full pipeline), SP-Mind autonomously decomposes the task into executable steps, invokes appropriate computational tools, and synthesizes re-sults into interpretable outputs. The framework is designed to handle the full complexity of modern spatial biology workflows, which typically require chaining multiple spe-cialized operations with careful attention to intermediate data formats. SP-Mind operates within a sandboxed execu-tion environment with configurable permission levels, sup-porting both interactive exploration and fully autonomous batch processing. 

3.1. Agent Architecture and Reasoning 

SP-Mind implements a ReAct-style reasoning loop (Yao et al., 2022), iterating through cycles of (1) observation, (2) thought, and (3) execution, until task completion (the agent generates a textual/visual summary for user). In the observa-tion phase, the agent ingests both user-provided task specifi-cations and execution outputs from prior actions, grounding subsequent reasoning in concrete computational state; the agent architecture provides automatic context compaction to manage long-horizon interactions. Following a data-first reasoning protocol, the agent prioritizes inspecting data structures and distributions before committing to analyti-cal actions, reducing cascading errors from misspecified thresholds. In the thought phase, the agent performs ex-plicit chain-of-thought reasoning to interpret observations, diagnose failures, and plan next steps; this deliberative pro-cess is externalized through dedicated reasoning blocks, enabling interpretable decision traces for complex multi-step workflows. In the execution phase, the agent takes action through a hybrid code-execution strategy: rather than invoking tools solely through predefined API schemas, SP-Mind uses CodeAct-style paradigm (Wang et al., 2024b), allowing it to generate and execute arbitrary Python scripts, run shell commands, perform file operations, and dynami-cally compose tool invocations. This execution flexibility allows the agent to perform compositional analyses and im-plement custom logic when pre-built tools are insufficient. Execution state persists across reasoning cycles through a dual-layer memory architecture. At the conversational layer, 

Algorithm 1 SP-Mind Skill-Augmented Agent Framework 

Require: Q: User query (task specification); T : Tool li-brary; S: Skill repository; K: Keyword mappings; σ:Session state 

Ensure: R: Final response with generated artifacts  

> 1:

// Task-Conditional Skill Injection  

> 2:

s∗ ← ∅  

> 3:

for each (spath , keywords) ∈ K do  

> 4:

if ∃ k ∈ keywords such that k ⊆ Q then  

> 5:

s∗ ← LOAD SKILL (spath , S) 

> 6:

break  

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

P ← BUILD PROMPT (T ) ⊕ s∗ 

> 10:

obs ← INIT CONTEXT (Q, P, σ ) 

> 11:

while not T IMED OUT () do  

> 12:

// Reason Step  

> 13:

τ ← REASON (obs , P, s ∗) 

> 14:

if ISCOMPLETE (τ ) then  

> 15:

return GENERATE RESPONSE (τ, σ ) 

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

// Execution: code generation or tool call  

> 18:

a ← GENERATE ACTION (τ ) 

> 19:

r ← EXECUTE INSANDBOX (a) 

> 20:

// Observation: update state with results  

> 21:

obs ← obs ∪ { (τ, a, r )} 

> 22:

σ ← UPDATE SESSION (σ, r ) 

> 23:

end while  

> 24:

return TIMEOUT RESPONSE (obs , σ )

session identifiers maintain dialogue history across turns, allowing the agent to reference prior reasoning and user clarifications. At the computational layer, the sandboxed execution environment preserves filesystem state, essential for multi-step computational biology tasks. Further details of our agent are provided in Appendix A. 

3.2. Modular Spatial Proteomics Tool Integration 

SP-Mind integrates established computational tools span-ning the spatial proteomics analysis pipeline. Each tool is encapsulated as a Python function with standardized inter-faces, enabling seamless orchestration while maintaining interoperability with underlying container-based executa-bles (Docker, Singularity). 

Image Preprocessing. Correcting illumination artifacts and autofluorescence prior to downstream analysis. Tools: 

BaSiC for flat-field and dark-field illumination profile es-timation, enabling correction of vignetting and uneven il-lumination across large tissue sections (Peng et al., 2017). Backsub for pixel-wise background subtraction, scaled by exposure time, to reduce marker bleed-through and autofluo-3SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

rescence in multi-cycle OME-TIFF images (Schapiro et al., 2022). 

Stitching & Registration. Assembling tiled multiplexed images into seamless whole-slide mosaics and aligning multi-cycle immunofluorescence data. Tool: ASHLAR, a vendor-agnostic framework that executes coordinated sub-pixel registration of over 10 3 tiles per image, ensuring single-cell accuracy across massive multi-cycle datasets (e.g., CODEX, CyCIF) (Muhlich et al., 2022). 

TMA Dearraying. Automatically detecting and extract-ing individual tissue cores from tissue microarray images. 

Tool: Coreograph, a deep learning semantic segmentation framework utilizing U-Net architecture and Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG) estimators to robustly dearray highly het-erogeneous samples, generating precise tissue masks via active contours (Schapiro et al., 2022). 

Cell Segmentation. Generating single-cell and nuclear masks from multiplexed images. Tools: UnMicst, a 3-class U-Net trained on ∼10,400 manually annotated nuclei across 7 distinct tissue morphologies (Yapp et al., 2022), used for generating per class probability maps. S3segmenter, a versatile marker-controlled watershed framework that exe-cutes instance segmentation with puncta detection and three cytoplasm segmentation modes (Schapiro et al., 2022). 

Cell Quantification. Extracting per-cell marker intensi-ties and morphological features. Tool: MCQuant, a high-throughput extraction engine powered by scikit-image that leverages 32-bit instance masks to compute mean protein expression and comprehensive spatial topologies (nuclei and cytoplasm), generating compatible CSV feature tables (Schapiro et al., 2022). 

Clustering & Phenotyping. Unsupervised discovery of cell populations and supervised phenotype assignment. 

Tools: Leiden (Traag et al., 2019) and Phenograph (Levine et al., 2015) algorithms for unsupervised clustering on marker expression profiles. Supervised phenotyping via rule-based classification using expert-defined marker thresh-olds and decision trees (Schapiro et al., 2022). All tools support both single-image and batch processing modes, with automatic parallelization across available com-putational resources. 

3.3. Spatial BioSkill Templates 

It’s important to note that declarative tool APIs alone are insufficient for complex scientific workflows. Reasoning about spatial proteomics queries, as well as effectively call-ing and chaining aforementioned tools, require advanced domain-specific knowledge. To bridge this gap, SP-Mind in-troduces Spatial BioSkill Templates: structured knowledge primitives encoding executable scientific methodologies as task-conditional chain-of-thought scaffolds. These skills are curated by domain experts with extensive experience in spatial proteomics workflows, encoding their procedural knowledge into reusable templates. The curation process went through 4 rounds of iterative refinement, repeatedly validated on real analytical tasks (150+). Each skill speci-fies reasoning strategy, prerequisite dependencies, recom-mended parameter heuristics, and error recovery protocols for a target spatial biology workflow, enabling the agent to execute complex pipelines with expert-level procedural guidance. To avoid context dilution, skills are dynamically injected into agent prompt based on task semantics. 

# 4. SP-Bench 

To bridge the critical validation gap mentioned in Section 2, we introduce SP-Bench, the first comprehensive hierarchi-cal evaluation framework designed specifically for agentic orchestration of the end-to-end spatial proteomics analysis pipeline. SP-Bench distinguishes itself through three key pillars: 

Comprehensive Coverage: SP-Bench spans 102 dis-tinct natural language queries covering all 8 stages of the fluorescence-based spatial proteomics analysis pipeline and includes clustering inputs from both fluorescence-based and mass-spectrometry imaging datasets. The queries are orga-nized into 18 task categories that reflect real-world analytical objectives such as signal calibration, artifact removal, and population profiling. 

Hierarchical Complexity: Queries are stratified into four difficulty tiers based on pipeline depth: 40 basic queries (single stage), 28 intermediate queries (involving 2 stages), 21 advanced queries (3 stages), and 13 challenging queries (4+ stages). Each tier includes both general queries and context-specific variants requiring specific configurations such as selecting appropriate nuclear channels. 

Input Data Diversity: The benchmark encompasses di-verse tissue types, sample formats, and acquisition param-eters. This diversity ensures robust evaluation across the technological heterogeneity encountered in real spatial pro-teomics research. 

4.1. Benchmark Creation & Dataset 

SP-Bench comprises natural language queries designed to evaluate an agent’s ability to orchestrate spatial proteomics analysis pipelines. We first established 8 core pipeline stages that are essential for multiplexed tissue image analysis. 1. 

4SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis   

> Figure 2. Overview of the SP-Bench Framework and Composition. The benchmark is constructed from eight fundamental spatial proteomics analysis stages (Left). These atomic tasks are combined to generate 3 additional stratified difficulty tiers (Center). The quantitative breakdown (Right) highlights the distribution of the 102 benchmark queries across difficulty levels and the balanced frequency of the 231 total stage invocations. Illustrative images adapted from (Schapiro et al., 2022).

Illumination: Correcting microscope-induced illumination intensity variations across image tiles. 2. Registration: 

Stitching and aligning multi-cycle acquisitions into a unified mosaic. 3. Background Subtraction: Eliminating tissue autofluorescence and imaging artifacts. 4. Tissue Dear-ray: Identifying and extracting individual tissue cores from microarrays. 5. Probability Mapping: Generating deep learning-based nuclear probability maps for downstream segmentation. 6. Segmentation: Converting probability maps into discrete cell and nuclear masks via segmentation. 

7. Quantification: Quantifying per-cell marker intensities and morphological properties. 8. Clustering: Grouping cells into biologically meaningful populations via unsuper-vised learning. To systematically evaluate agent capabilities across varying levels of complexity, we organize the eight pipeline stages into four difficulty tiers comprising 18 task categories that reflect real-world spatial proteomics analytical objectives. The Basic tier (8 categories, 40 queries) evaluates mastery of stages modules in isolation. The Intermediate tier (4 cate-gories, 28 queries) introduces two-stage workflows such as Pre-processing (illumination correction followed by stitch-ing). The Advanced tier (3 categories, 21 queries) requires orchestrating three-stage pipelines. Finally, the Challenging tier (3 categories, 13 queries) presents complex end-to-end workflows which requires the agent to autonomously orches-trate 4 or more stages from raw image acquisition through final cell population analysis. This hierarchical structure enables fine-grained diagnosis of agent failure modes. For each task category, we first prompted Gemini 3 Pro to generate natural language queries that would realistically re-flect how researchers might request specific analytical opera-tions, including both general operation and context-specific configurations. All generated queries then underwent rig-orous validation by human domain experts with expertise in spatial proteomics workflows. Specifically, three bioin-formatics experts verified each query for: (1) biological plausibility of the requested operation and configuration, (2) correct specification of module dependencies and data flow, and (3) alignment with realistic user requests in spatial proteomics practice. Queries judged problematic by at least two of the three experts (32 out of the initial 134) were ex-cluded from the final benchmark. Furthermore, the experts actively revised and refined queries that contained overly ambiguous instructions or incorrect workflow sequencing to ensure both quality and realism. 

Benchmark Evaluation Metric The benchmark employs an execution accuracy metric: the percentage of queries for which the agent successfully completes the requested 5SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

analysis and fulfills the query objective. A query is counted as successful only when the agent uses the appropriate tool or code, follows all user-specified parameters, preserves the correct execution order and intermediate data flow, produces the requested outputs in the specified format and location, and completes execution without runtime errors or timeout. We further require that the agent avoid unintended modifica-tions to input data or directory structure, provide an accurate summary of the completed operations, and transparently re-port any errors or warnings encountered during execution. For the full success criteria, see Appendix C.3. 

Input Data Preparation To ensure realistic and validated inputs for each task category, we derived our benchmark data from authoritative sources: the MCMICRO exemplar dataset (Schapiro et al., 2022), MAPS cHL dataset (Sha-ban et al., 2024), and PDAC IMC Dataset (Sussman et al., 2024). Our input dataset covers 5 important tissue envi-ronments (Meningioma, GI Stromal Tumor, Normal Colon, Classic Hodgkin Lymphoma, and Pancreatic Ductal Adeno-carcinoma) and 4 mainstream imaging technologies (CyCIF, MIBI, CODEX, IMC). 

# 5. Experiments 

5.1. Experiment Setup 

We evaluate SP-Mind using Claude Sonnet 4 as the uniform backbone LLM across all experimental conditions to ensure fair comparison. We benchmark SP-Mind (along with its no-skill version) against 5 baselines, ranging from general-purpose frameworks to specialized biomedical agents. All baselines utilize their official implementations with de-fault configurations: AutoGen (Wu et al., 2024), a widely-adopted general-purpose framework for building LLM agents. We deploy it here as a single-agent baseline, ex-cluding its multi-agent conversational features to ensure a direct comparison of reasoning abilities. Biomni (Huang et al., 2025), a biomedical agent framework implementing a ReAct-style reasoning loop coupled with CodeAct execu-tion. It is natively integrated with a broad suite of standard bioinformatics tools. ToolUniverse (Gao et al., 2025), a comprehensive tool-augmented framework designed for sci-entific computing, providing extensive API coverage across general biology and data analysis domains. Biomni-SP 

and ToolUniverse-SP , both are domain-adapted variant of Biomni and ToolUniverse that we engineered specifically for this study. They retain the original respective agent ar-chitecture but is equipped with the spatial proteomics tool suite used by SP-Mind. We evaluate the agents on 3 com-plementary evaluation suites. 

SP-Bench: Our proposed benchmark, described in Sec-tion 4. This benchmark comprehensively evaluates agents’ abilities in spatial proteomics analysis through 102 diverse queries across 18 categories, 8 stages, and 4 difficulty tiers. Model performance is directly measured by the number of successful executions across all queries. 

CRC-CODEX Quantification Challenge: We bench-mark the agents on their ability to execute quantification tasks on 10 high-resolution TIFF images from the CRC-CODEX (Sch ¨urch et al., 2020) dataset. The quantified results are compared to the ground truth from the origi-nal dataset using a comprehensive suite of 5 metrics. We evaluate total marker abundance via Pearson and Spearman correlations, phenotype distribution fidelity using Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012), and bi-ological co-expression preservation via correlation matrix similarity. We also employ a grid-based spatial Spearman correlation to verify signal localization without requiring strict cell-to-cell mapping. These measures are designed to be segmentation-tolerant, ensuring that agents are not overly penalized for making segmentation choices that differ from the ground truth while still capturing the correct biological signal through quantification. 

Cell Annotation Challenge: In this suite, we benchmark the agents on annotating cells based on marker expression data. We utilize 4 large-scale CSV datasets from MAPS cHL (Shaban et al., 2024) and PDAC IMC (Sussman et al., 2024), covering ≈2 million cells, to measure the agents’ annotation accuracy. To evaluate performance, we utilize CyteOnto (Ahuja et al., 2025) instead of naive string match-ing. CyteOnto is a semantic similarity framework that maps labelled and ground-truth labels to Cell Ontology terms us-ing text embeddings of LLM-augmented descriptions. It derives a kernel-induced similarity score (ranging from 0 to 1) to quantify accuracy, ensuring that semantic relationships and biological meaning are preserved. 

5.2. Quantitative Analysis SP-Bench As shown in Table 1, SP-Mind achieves con-sistent state-of-the-art performance (68.9% average) across all four difficulty tiers, marking a significant improvement over comparable agent baselines. We observe a clear per-formance hierarchy where domain-specialized agents with spatial proteomics toolkit dramatically outperform general-ist agents. While generalist models such as Biomni (19.3%), ToolUniverse (15.0%), and AutoGen (14.7%) struggle to ex-ecute complex spatial queries—collapsing to near-zero per-formance in the Advanced and Challenging tiers—SP-Mind maintains robustness throughout. Furthermore, SP-Mind outperforms the strongest specialized baseline, Biomni-SP (55.4%), by a substantial margin. This gap is particularly sig-nificant in the Advanced tier, where SP-Mind (61.9%) nearly doubles the success rate of Biomni-SP (36.5%), demon-6SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis   

> Table 1. Agent Performance on SP-Bench. The benchmark comprises 102 distinct spatial proteomics queries spanning 18 categories and 8 analysis stages. Evaluation is stratified by difficulty: Basic (40 queries, 8 categories), Intermediate (28, 4), Advanced (21, 3), and Challenging (13, 3). Scores report execution success rates (%). SP-Mind significantly outperforms both generalist agents and domain-specific variants across all difficulty tiers. We run the evaluation 3 times, with mean and standard deviation reported.

Difficulty AutoGen Biomni ToolUniverse Biomni-SP ToolUniverse-SP SP-Mind (no skill) SP-Mind 

Basic 31.7 ± 3.8 37.5 ± 5.0 30.8 ± 3.8 88.3 ± 1.4 90.8 ± 1.4 95.0 ± 2.5 95.8 ± 1.4 

Intermediate 23.8 ± 2.1 28.6 ± 0.0 21.4 ± 3.6 73.8 ± 4.1 70.2 ± 7.4 82.1 ± 7.1 84.5 ± 7.4 

Advanced 3.2 ± 5.5 11.1 ± 2.7 7.9 ± 2.7 36.5 ± 5.5 25.4 ± 7.3 44.4 ± 7.3 61.9 ± 4.8 

Challenging 0.0 ± 0.0 0.0 ± 0.0 0.0 ± 0.0 23.1 ± 0.0 15.4 ± 7.7 28.2 ± 4.4 33.3 ± 4.4 Average 14.7 19.3 15.0 55.4 50.5 62.4 68.9       

> Table 2. Agent Performance on CRC-CODEX Quantification Challenge. Evaluation is conducted using segmentation-tolerant metrics to compare agent quantification against Ground Truth. Each agent quantified the same dataset (10 images) 3 times; values reported are the mean and standard deviation across trials. Key metrics include Pearson rand Spearman ρfor marker abundance correlation, Correlation Matrix similarity for biological relationship preservation, and Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) for phenotype population distance (lower is better). Generalist baselines (Biomni, ToolUniverse, AutoGen) are excluded as their produced outputs significantly fall short of the expectation of the task (e.g., largely incomplete csv, running grading script is not possible).

Agent Pearson r Spearman ρ Corr Matrix MMD Spatial Spearman 

Biomni-SP 0.940 ± 0.044 0.870 ± 0.146 0.703 ± 0.097 0.390 ± 0.110 0.460 ± 0.112 ToolUniverse-SP 0.929 ± 0.068 0.865 ± 0.156 0.711 ± 0.096 0.393 ± 0.123 0.482 ± 0.107 SP-Mind (no skill) 0.945 ± 0.038 0.892 ± 0.132 0.725 ± 0.096 0.370 ± 0.097 0.497 ± 0.112 SP-Mind 0.953 ± 0.028 0.902 ± 0.123 0.727 ± 0.110 0.368 ± 0.094 0.513 ± 0.105        

> Table 3. Agent Performance on the Cell Annotation Challenge. Evaluation is conducted across 4 datasets encompassing ≈2 million cells. Each agent annotates each dataset 3 times. We report the CyteOnto GHK similarity score (Ahuja et al., 2025) averaged across all cells and all trials, which quantifies the semantic similarity between agent and ground-truth annotations, along with its standard deviation. This metric maps labels to the Cell Ontology space using Qwen3-Embedding-8B model (Yang et al., 2025) and applies a Gaussian Heat Kernel with σ= 0 .25 to penalize semantic drift. ASTIR (Geuenich et al., 2021) is included as a specialized ML-based baseline. Generalist baselines (Biomni, ToolUniverse) are excluded as their cell-annotation capabilities are subsumed by their SP-specific variants.
> Dataset

AutoGen Biomni-SP ToolUniverse-SP ASTIR SP-Mind (no skill) SP-Mind 

cHL 1 MIBI 0.567 ± 0.113 0.606 ± 0.088 0.602 ± 0.049 0.339 ± 0.000 0.534 ± 0.054 0.630 ± 0.021 

cHL 2 MIBI 5 0.616 ± 0.052 0.663 ± 0.045 0.655 ± 0.075 0.258 ± 0.000 0.672 ± 0.064 0.765 ± 0.058 

cHL CODEX 0.668 ± 0.068 0.599 ± 0.090 0.668 ± 0.020 0.738 ± 0.000 0.663 ± 0.025 0.682 ± 0.045 PDAC IMC 0.592 ± 0.139 0.706 ± 0.019 0.693 ± 0.042 0.426 ± 0.000 0.762 ± 0.063 0.648 ± 0.040 

Average 0.610 0.643 0.654 0.440 0.657 0.681 

strating superior capability in handling multi-step complex analysis. 

CRC-CODEX Quantification Challenge Table 2 details agent performance, where SP-Mind obtains the best mean score across all five segmentation-tolerant metrics. SP-Mind achieves the highest alignment with Ground Truth in global marker abundance, securing a Pearson r of 0.953 and a Spearman ρ of 0.902, indicating exceptional linear and rank-order precision. Beyond simple abundance, SP-Mind demonstrates a superior ability to preserve high-dimensional biological heterogeneity, attaining the lowest Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) score of 0.368 and the high-est Correlation Matrix similarity (0.727). Notably, in the grid-based Spatial Spearman metric—which penalizes cor-rect aggregate counts if they appear in the wrong image location—SP-Mind (0.513) outperforms the nearest com-petitor, ToolUniverse-SP (0.482), by a meaningful margin. This performance suggests that SP-Mind’s autonomous se-lection of tool parameters and segmentation strategies aligns more closely with expert scientific practices, allowing it to capture complex marker co-expression patterns and pheno-type population structures that baselines miss. 

Cell Annotation Challenge Table 3 summarizes agent performance on the Cell Annotation Challenge. SP-Mind achieves the highest average CyteOnto GHK similarity score (0.681) across the four datasets, outperforming all agentic 7SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

baselines and the specialized ASTIR model. The gains are most pronounced on the two MIBI datasets: SP-Mind reaches 0.630 on cHL 1 MIBI and 0.765 on cHL 2 MIBI 5, exceeding the strongest competing agent by 0.024 and 0.102, respectively. The results also reveal complemen-tary strengths and limitations across methods. ASTIR, the specialized ML baseline, excels on cHL CODEX (0.738), but it fails to generalize to other modalities, dropping to sig-nificantly lower scores elsewhere, likely due to sensitivity to feature sparsity. In contrast, SP-Mind provides the best over-all balance across datasets, ranking first on both MIBI tasks and remaining competitive on cHL CODEX. However, on PDAC IMC, SP-Mind (0.648) underperforms Biomni-SP (0.706), ToolUniverse-SP (0.693), and the no-skill ablation (0.762), indicating that the current skill templates may not transfer uniformly across all imaging modalities. 

5.3. Qualitative Analysis 

Extensive analysis of execution logs reveals that the perfor-mance gap between SP-Mind and generalist agents stems primarily from a lack of methodological foresight rather than coding incapacity. Generalist agents frequently strug-gle with the tacit constraints of spatial biology such as phys-ical stage drift in stitching, often reverting to naive algorith-mic reinvention. SP-Mind’s skill-augmented architecture ef-fectively bridges this gap, acting as a cognitive guardrail that enforces expert protocols and ensures scientific fidelity. The evaluation further reveals that SP-Mind effectively bridges the gap between the brittleness of specialized ML models and the imprecision of generalist agents in cell annotation. While specialized baselines like ASTIR falter on sparse modalities (MIBI), SP-Mind leverages semantic plasticity and domain-specific methods to resolve subtle phenotypic states. We illustrate these qualitative findings through two representative case studies (Figure 3). 

Image Stitching & Registration Case Study This task requires stitching the MCMICRO exemplar-002 dataset (10 cyclic OME-TIFF acquisitions, each containing a 5 × 6

mosaic of tiles) into a seamless tissue map stored as an OME-TIFF. The baseline agent, Biomni, attempted to write a custom stitching algorithm from scratch. While it suc-cessfully parsed the metadata to determine the 5 × 6 grid layout, it failed to perform actual image registration. Instead, it implemented a “blind stitching” approach, placing tiles based on theoretical stage coordinates with a hard-coded 10% overlap. This ignores mechanical stage drift, resulting in alignment artifacts. Furthermore, it struggled with OME-XML encoding and created separate files for pyramid levels rather than a single multi-resolution file. In contrast, SP-Mind correctly called the domain-specific ASHLAR tool. When initially faced with a parameter error, the agent en-gaged in active reflection, inspecting the function signature to correct the input arguments. It successfully executed phase-correlation based registration to quantify and correct sub-pixel stage drift (calculating offsets of ≈ 41 pixels), producing a scientifically accurate, fully aligned OME-TIFF in fewer interaction turns. 

Cell Annotation (cHL 2 MIBI 5) Case Study This task involves diagnosing cell identities across 12 clusters in a classical Hodgkin lymphoma dataset using 46 protein mark-ers. The baseline agent, Autogen, relies on raw absolute expression means; consequently, ubiquitous structural chan-nels (e.g., Histone H3) dominate its top-marker evidence. This obscures discriminative lineage markers, leading to lineage collapse (e.g., annotating the ground-truth dendritic-cell and NK clusters as generic “T cells”) and loss of subtype structure (merging M1 and M2 into a single “Macrophages” label). In contrast, SP-Mind employs a domain-specific rank/enrichment analysis to normalize signal-scale varia-tion and down-weight non-informative markers, thereby recovering distinct lineages (DC, NK, CD8 T). Further-more, SP-Mind distinguishes subtle phenotypic states such as macrophage polarization, separating an M2-like CD163 hi 

compartment from a more inflammatory M1-like state (char-acterized by CD68 + and Granzyme B expression), demon-strating the model’s ability to emulate expert biological reasoning through statistical ranking and hierarchical logic. 

Failure Case Analysis Despite SP-Mind’s overall robust-ness, our execution traces reveal several recurring failure modes in complex multi-stage workflows. A representative failure mode arises from file-management and state-tracking errors. When the workflow is long, after successfully com-pleting several upstream stages, the agent may save an in-termediate artifact to an incorrect directory or pass a stale file path to a downstream tool. A second failure mode oc-curs during background subtraction. Unlike several other pipeline stages that expose relatively standardized inputs, background subtraction can require additional input engi-neering before execution, such as adapting a marker meta-data file into the format expected by the underlying tool. When background subtraction is requested as an isolated task, SP-Mind usually inspects the required schema, modi-fies the metadata file, and completes the operation success-fully. However, in longer chained workflows, the agent may under-investigate formatting errors. These observations sug-gest that autonomous spatial proteomics agents require not only stronger biological reasoning, but also more rigorous bookkeeping mechanisms for managing files, intermediate artifacts, and tool-specific input contracts across extended analytical pipelines. 8SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis  

> Figure 3. Comparison of agent behaviors on two spatial biology tasks. Top: Image Stitching & Registration. Bottom: Cell Annotation.

# 6. Conclusion 

We presented SP-Mind, an agent that bridges the gap be-tween generalist reasoning and domain-specific execution in spatial proteomics. A primary limitation of the current framework is its reliance on human-curated skill templates; the agent cannot yet autonomously formalize novel work-flows into reusable skills. Future work will address this by implementing autonomous skill synthesis, enabling the agent to crystallize successful execution traces into new procedural templates. This capability will close the loop between active exploration and knowledge consolidation, advancing agents to continuously learning scientific assis-tants. 

# Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

# References 

Ahuja, G., Antill, A., Su, Y., Dall’Olio, G. M., Basnayake, S., Karlsson, G., and Dhapola, P. Multi-agent ai enables evidence-based cell annotation in single-cell transcrip-tomics. bioRxiv , pp. 2025–11, 2025. Bodenmiller, B. Highly multiplexed imaging in the omics era: understanding tissue structures in health and disease. 

Nature Methods , 21:2209–2211, 2024. doi: 10.1038/ s41592-024-02538-6. Boettiger, C. An introduction to docker for reproducible research. ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review , 49 (1):71–79, 2015. Buckup, M., Figueiredo, I., Ioannou, G., Ozbey, S., Cabal, R., Tabachnikova, A., Troncoso, L., Le Berichel, J., Zhao, Z., Ward, S. C., et al. Multiparametric cellular and spatial organization in cancer tissue lesions with a streamlined pipeline. Nature Biomedical Engineering , pp. 1–15, 2025. Bussi, Y. and Keren, L. Multiplexed image analysis: what have we achieved and where are we headed? nature methods , 21(12):2212–2215, 2024. Di Tommaso, P., Chatzou, M., Floden, E. W., Barja, P. P., Palumbo, E., and Notredame, C. Nextflow enables repro-ducible computational workflows. Nature biotechnology ,35(4):316–319, 2017. Gao, S., Fang, A., Huang, Y., Giunchiglia, V., Noori, A., Schwarz, J. R., Ektefaie, Y., Kondic, J., and Zitnik, M. Empowering biomedical discovery with ai agents. Cell ,187(22):6125–6151, 2024. Gao, S., Zhu, R., Sui, P., Kong, Z., Aldogom, S., Huang, Y., Noori, A., Shamji, R., Parvataneni, K., Tsiligkaridis, T., et al. Democratizing ai scientists using tooluniverse. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23426 , 2025. Geuenich, M. J., Hou, J., Lee, S., Ayub, S., Jackson, H. W., and Campbell, K. R. Automated assignment of cell iden-tity from single-cell multiplexed imaging and proteomic data. Cell systems , 12(12):1173–1186, 2021. Ghafarollahi, A. and Buehler, M. J. Sciagents: automating scientific discovery through bioinspired multi-agent in-telligent graph reasoning. Advanced Materials , 37(22): 2413523, 2025. 9SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

Giesen, C., Wang, H. A., Schapiro, D., Zivanovic, N., Ja-cobs, A., Hattendorf, B., Sch ¨uffler, P. J., Grolimund, D., Buhmann, J. M., Brandt, S., et al. Highly multiplexed imaging of tumor tissues with subcellular resolution by mass cytometry. Nature methods , 11(4):417–422, 2014. Goltsev, Y., Samusik, N., Kennedy-Darling, J., Bhate, S., Hale, M., Vazquez, G., Black, S., and Nolan, G. P. Deep profiling of mouse splenic architecture with codex multi-plexed imaging. Cell , 174(4):968–981, 2018. Gretton, A., Borgwardt, K. M., Rasch, M. J., Sch ¨olkopf, B., and Smola, A. A kernel two-sample test. The journal of machine learning research , 13(1):723–773, 2012. Huang, K., Zhang, S., Wang, H., Qu, Y., Lu, Y., Roohani, Y., Li, R., Qiu, L., Li, G., Zhang, J., et al. Biomni: A general-purpose biomedical ai agent. biorxiv , 2025. Jiang, Y., Black, K. C., Geng, G., Park, D., Zou, J., Ng, A. Y., and Chen, J. H. Medagentbench: A realistic virtual ehr environment to benchmark medical llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14654 , 2025. Jimenez, C. E., Yang, J., Wettig, A., Yao, S., Pei, K., Press, O., and Narasimhan, K. Swe-bench: Can language mod-els resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770 , 2023. Jin, Q., Yang, Y., Chen, Q., and Lu, Z. Genegpt: Aug-menting large language models with domain tools for improved access to biomedical information. Bioinformat-ics , 40(2):btae075, 2024. Langley, P. Crafting papers on machine learning. In Langley, P. (ed.), Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2000) , pp. 1207–1216, Stan-ford, CA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann. Laurent, J. M., Janizek, J. D., Ruzo, M., Hinks, M. M., Hammerling, M. J., Narayanan, S., Ponnapati, M., White, A. D., and Rodriques, S. G. Lab-bench: Measuring capa-bilities of language models for biology research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10362 , 2024. Levine, J. H., Simonds, E. F., Bendall, S. C., Davis, K. L., Amir, E.-a. D., Tadmor, M. D., Litvin, O., Fienberg, H. G., Jager, A., Zunder, E. R., et al. Data-driven phenotypic dis-section of aml reveals progenitor-like cells that correlate with prognosis. Cell , 162(1):184–197, 2015. Lin, J.-R., Izar, B., Wang, S., Yapp, C., Mei, S., Shah, P. M., Santagata, S., and Sorger, P. K. Highly multiplexed im-munofluorescence imaging of human tissues and tumors using t-cycif and conventional optical microscopes. eLife ,7:e31657, 2018. Liu, X., Yu, H., Zhang, H., Xu, Y., Lei, X., Lai, H., Gu, Y., Ding, H., Men, K., Yang, K., et al. Agentbench: Evalu-ating llms as agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03688 ,2023. Magness, A., Colliver, E., Enfield, K. S., Lee, C., Shimato, M., Daly, E., Moore, D. A., Sivakumar, M., Valand, K., Levi, D., et al. Deep cell phenotyping and spatial anal-ysis of multiplexed imaging with tracerx-phlex. Nature Communications , 15(1):5135, 2024. Mialon, G., Fourrier, C., Wolf, T., LeCun, Y., and Scialom, T. Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2023. Mitchener, L., Laurent, J. M., Andonian, A., Tenmann, B., Narayanan, S., Wellawatte, G. P., White, A., Sani, L., and Rodriques, S. G. Bixbench: a comprehensive benchmark for llm-based agents in computational biology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00096 , 2025. Muhlich, J. L., Chen, Y.-A., Yapp, C., Russell, D., Santagata, S., and Sorger, P. K. Stitching and registering highly multiplexed whole-slide images of tissues and tumors using ashlar. Bioinformatics , 38(19):4613–4621, 2022. Peng, T., Thorn, K., Schroeder, T., Wang, L., Theis, F. J., Marr, C., and Navab, N. A basic tool for background and shading correction of optical microscopy images. Nature communications , 8(1):14836, 2017. Qi, C., Wang, W., Jiang, S., Liu, Q., Song, X., Fang, H., and Wei, Z. Artificial intelligence agents for biological research: a survey. Briefings in Bioinformatics , 27(1): bbag075, 2026. Qin, Y., Liang, S., Ye, Y., Zhu, K., Yan, L., Lu, Y., Lin, Y., Cong, X., Tang, X., Qian, B., et al. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789 , 2023. Qu, Y., Huang, K., Yin, M., Zhan, K., Liu, D., Yin, D., Cousins, H. C., Johnson, W. A., Wang, X., Shah, M., et al. Crispr-gpt for agentic automation of gene-editing experiments. Nature Biomedical Engineering , 10(2):245– 258, 2026. Quail, D. F. and Walsh, L. A. Revolutionizing can-cer research with spatial proteomics and visual intel-ligence. Nature Methods , 21:2216–2219, 2024. doi: 10.1038/s41592-024-02542-w. Roohani, Y., Lee, A., Huang, Q., Vora, J., Steinhart, Z., Huang, K., Marson, A., Liang, P., and Leskovec, J. Biodiscoveryagent: An ai agent for designing genetic per-turbation experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17631 ,2024. 10 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

Sakshi, S., Tyagi, U., Kumar, S., Seth, A., Selvakumar, R., Nieto, O., Duraiswami, R., Ghosh, S., and Manocha, D. Mmau: A massive multi-task audio understanding and reasoning benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.19168 ,2024. Schapiro, D., Sokolov, A., Yapp, C., Chen, Y.-A., Muhlich, J. L., Hess, J., Creason, A. L., Nirmal, A. J., Baker, G. J., Nariya, M. K., et al. Mcmicro: a scalable, modular image-processing pipeline for multiplexed tissue imaging. 

Nature methods , 19(3):311–315, 2022. Sch ¨urch, C. M., Bhate, S. S., Barlow, G. L., Phillips, D. J., Noti, L., Zlobec, I., Chu, P., Black, S., Demeter, J., McIl-wain, D. R., et al. Coordinated cellular neighborhoods orchestrate antitumoral immunity at the colorectal cancer invasive front. Cell , 182(5):1341–1359, 2020. Shaban, M., Bai, Y., Qiu, H., Mao, S., Yeung, J., Yeo, Y. Y., Shanmugam, V., Chen, H., Zhu, B., Weirather, J. L., et al. Maps: pathologist-level cell type annotation from tissue images through machine learning. Nature Communications , 15(1):28, 2024. Sussman, J. H., Kim, N., Kemp, S. B., Traum, D., Katsuda, T., Kahn, B. M., Xu, J., Kim, I.-K., Eskandarian, C., Delman, D., et al. Multiplexed imaging mass cytometry analysis characterizes the vascular niche in pancreatic cancer. Cancer research , 84(14):2364–2376, 2024. Traag, V. A., Waltman, L., and Van Eck, N. J. From lou-vain to leiden: guaranteeing well-connected communities. 

Scientific reports , 9(1):1–12, 2019. Wang, L., Ma, C., Feng, X., Zhang, Z., Yang, H., Zhang, J., Chen, Z., Tang, J., Chen, X., Lin, Y., et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science , 18(6):186345, 2024a. Wang, X., Hu, Z., Lu, P., Zhu, Y., Zhang, J., Subramaniam, S., Loomba, A. R., Zhang, S., Sun, Y., and Wang, W. Scibench: Evaluating college-level scientific problem-solving abilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10635 , 2023. Wang, X., Chen, Y., Yuan, L., Zhang, Y., Li, Y., Peng, H., and Ji, H. Executable code actions elicit better llm agents. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , 2024b. Wu, Q., Bansal, G., Zhang, J., Wu, Y., Li, B., Zhu, E., Jiang, L., Zhang, X., Zhang, S., Liu, J., et al. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversations. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. Xi, Z., Chen, W., Guo, X., He, W., Ding, Y., Hong, B., Zhang, M., Wang, J., Jin, S., Zhou, E., et al. The rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey. 

Science China Information Sciences , 68(2):121101, 2025. Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K. R., and Cao, Y. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international conference on learning representations , 2022. Yapp, C., Novikov, E., Jang, W.-D., Vallius, T., Chen, Y.-A., Cicconet, M., Maliga, Z., Jacobson, C. A., Wei, D., Santagata, S., et al. Unmicst: Deep learning with real aug-mentation for robust segmentation of highly multiplexed images of human tissues. Communications Biology , 5(1): 1263, 2022. 11 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

# A. SP-Mind Core Implementation Details 

This appendix provides a detailed exposition of the SP-Mind operational framework. The system implements a skill-augmented ReAct (Reasoning and Acting) loop that enables dynamic tool orchestration for complex spatial proteomics workflows. The agent navigates workflows through iterative cycles of reasoning, code execution, and observation—guided by task-conditional procedural knowledge. 

A.1. The Skill-Augmented ReAct Cycle 

SP-Mind extends the foundational ReAct paradigm (Yao et al., 2022) with structured procedural knowledge injection. The agent iterates through three core phases: • Observe Ingest user task specifications and execution outputs from prior actions—including tool return values, file contents, terminal outputs, and error traces. Following a data-first protocol, the agent is instructed to inspect data structures and distributions (via summary statistics and print operations) before committing to analytical parameters. • Reason: Analyze the current observations against the injected Skill Template. The template provides structured scaffolding (prerequisite checks and parameter heuristics) that attempts to prevent the LLM from hallucinating invalid workflow steps. • Execute: Generate and run executable code within a managed environment. Unlike structured tool-calling approaches that limit agents to pre-defined API endpoints, SP-Mind utilizes the Claude Code CLI interface to compose arbitrary Python scripts. This allows for on-the-fly data transformation and logic patching essential for scientific computing. 

A.2. Architecture 

SP-Mind relies on four interconnected components to execute the skill-augmented ReAct cycle: A.2.1. R EASONING ENGINE 

SP-Mind employs the Claude Sonnet-series (selectable) as the backbone LLM, leveraging its code execution capabilities through the official claude-agent-sdk . The LLM functions as the central orchestrator, maintaining multi-turn state via the SDK’s session management. SP-Mind employs a composite system prompt strategy that dynamically assembles: 1. Environment Context: Working directory. 2. Tool Definitions: Signatures for the spatial proteomics pipeline tools (e.g., unetcoreograph , s3segmenter ). 3. Data-First Constraints: Instructions to explore data distributions prior to analysis. A.2.2. S KILL TEMPLATE REPOSITORY 

An expert curated collection of structured methodology templates encoding expert procedural knowledge. Skills are indexed by task-type keywords (mapped in SKILL KEYWORDS ). When a specific task (e.g., “clustering,” “stitching”) is detected in the user query, the relevant Markdown-based skill is retrieved and injected directly into the system prompt. This ensures the agent receives focused procedural guidance (prerequisites, parameter heuristics, and error recovery protocols) without context window dilution. Below is an example skill template for cell annotation. 12 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

Cell Type Annotation Skill Template 

# Cell Type Annotation Skill ## Analysis Methodology ### 1. Use Rank-Based Analysis - Do NOT rely solely on absolute expression values per cluster - For each marker, calculate its **ranking** across all clusters - Focus on which clusters rank highest for specific markers - Even with low absolute values, the cluster ranking #1 for a marker may still represent that cell type ### 2. Consider Marker Combination Patterns - Do NOT make annotations based on a single highly-expressed marker - Consult your knowledge of classic marker combinations for each cell type - Consider both **positive markers** AND **negative markers** (exclusion markers) ### 3. Identify Each Cluster’s Unique Markers - For each cluster, find markers that are **most unique relative to other clusters** - Identify which markers rank #1 or #2 in that cluster - Look for markers where a cluster is significantly higher than all others - These unique markers are the strongest evidence for cell type identity ### 4. Be Aware of Panel Limitations - The marker panel may lack classic markers for certain cell types - If a key marker is missing, use alternative lineage markers - For clusters that are difficult to clearly determine, use generic labels like "Other" or "Unknown" ### 5. Workflow Summary 1. Load data and calculate mean expression per cluster 2. Calculate rankings: for each marker, rank clusters from highest to lowest 3. For each cluster, identify its top-ranked markers 4. Match marker combinations to known cell type signatures 5. Verify with negative markers (what the cluster does NOT express) 6. Assign annotations based on the combined evidence ## Output Requirements In addition to the full annotated CSV file, you MUST also save a summary file called ‘ annotation_summary.csv‘ in the same output directory, which should contain: - **Cluster**: The cluster ID (integer) - **Annotation**: The assigned cell type label This makes it easy to quickly verify the annotation results. 

A.2.3. T OOL EXECUTION LAYER (C ONTAINER ABSTRACTION )To ensure reproducibility across computing environments (local workstations vs. HPC clusters), SP-Mind abstracts the execution logic from the runtime environment. The spatial proteomics tool suite automatically detects and utilizes the available container runtime—Docker, Apptainer, or Singularity—allowing the agent to invoke complex binary dependencies (e.g., Ashlar, UnMicst) through uniform Python wrappers without managing low-level container flags. SP-Mind operationalizes the container abstraction through a “Python-to-Container Bridge” pattern that encapsulates complex CLI dependencies within Python signatures. The wrapper functions perform critical orchestration logic beyond simple command execution. First, they implement automatic path resolution, dynamically calculating the common parent directory of input/output files to establish valid bind mounts regardless of the host OS file structure. Second, they enforce parameter consistency checks prior to container instantiation, preventing runtime failures caused by invalid flag combinations. Finally, rather than returning raw exit codes, the wrappers capture standard streams (stdout/stderr) to construct a semantic research 13 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

log. This text-based return object summarizes file sizes, execution process, and error traces, providing the LLM with a comprehensive observation space to reason about the tool’s success or failure. A.2.4. S TATE MANAGER 

State persistence operates at two layers. At the conversational layer, the SDK’s session management ( session id )maintains dialogue history across turns, enabling the agent to reference prior reasoning without redundant context re-injection. At the computational layer, the sandboxed execution environment preserves filesystem state—generated segmentation masks, quantification tables, and diagnostic plots persist across reasoning cycles, allowing subsequent queries to build upon prior computational artifacts. This dual-layer architecture is essential for iterative scientific workflows where multi-step analyses span extended user interactions. A.2.5. F ULL PROMPT ARCHITECTURE 

SP-Mind uses a modular prompting scheme composed of: (1) a fixed base system prompt defining the agent role, execution environment, available tools, and data-first reasoning protocol; (2) standardized tool descriptions and usage guidance; and (3) a dynamically injected Spatial BioSkill Template selected based on the user query/task type. Thus, the full prompt architecture is: [Base prompt] + [tool specifications] + [task-relevant skill template] + [user query]. The base prompt is shown below. 14 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

Base System Prompt 

## You are SP-Mind, an expert spatial proteomics data analysis assistant. ## Your Environment - Working directory: {self.path} ## Available SP-Mind Tool Modules {tool_modules_str} ## How to Use SP-Mind Tools ### Step 1: Check function signature before using // ... example code ... ### Step 2: Import and use the function // ... example code ... For longer scripts, write to a file first and then execute it. ## Container Runtime Note SP-Mind tools auto-detect and use available container runtime (Docker, Apptainer, or Singularity). - On Mac/local: Docker is preferred (start Docker Desktop if needed) - On HPC cluster: Apptainer/Singularity is preferred All tools accept ‘container_runtime‘ parameter: "auto" (default), "docker", "apptainer ", "singularity" ## CRITICAL: Data-First Approach When analyzing data (especially for tasks like cell type annotation, clustering, or quantification): 1. **EXPLORE DATA FIRST** - Before writing any analysis code: - Load the data and print its structure - Calculate summary statistics (mean, std, range) for each group/cluster - Print the actual values to understand the data distribution - Examine what markers/features are high or low for each group 2. **MAKE DATA-DRIVEN DECISIONS** - Base your analysis parameters on observed values: - Don’t use generic thresholds (like 0.3) without checking the data - Look at actual expression ranges before setting cutoffs - Examine marker combinations, not just single markers 3. **ITERATE AND REFINE** - Don’t write one big script: - Execute small code blocks and print results - Adjust your approach based on what you observe - Re-examine ambiguous cases // ... example workflow ... ## Instructions 1. Analyze the user’s biomedical task 2. **Explore and understand the data first** by printing intermediate results 3. Write and execute Python code using SP-Mind tools 4. Print results clearly and save plots to files 5. Explain your findings Solve the user’s task step by step using the available tools. 

15 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

# B. Algorithm Execution Flow 

This section provides a step-by-step exposition of SP-Mind’s execution pipeline. 

B.1. Step 1: Initialization and Environment Preparation 

The agent initialization establishes the execution environment through sequential operations: 1. Configuration Loading: The agent accepts parameters for the working directory, timeout, and permission limits. 2. Tool Registry Loading: The read module2api() function parses function signatures and docstrings from the tool directory into a structured dictionary, enabling the agent to programmatically discover available tools. 3. Session State Initialization: The session identifier ( session id ) is initialized to None , marking the start of a fresh conversation. 

B.2. Step 2: Task-Conditional Skill Retrieval 

Upon invoking go(prompt) , the agent executes retrieve skill(task) :• Keyword Matching: The prompt is normalized and compared against the SKILL KEYWORDS dictionary. For example, the keyword “quantif” triggers the loading of quantification/cell quantification.md .• Graceful Fallback: If no keywords match, the agent proceeds with the base system prompt (general tool documentation only), avoiding the injection of irrelevant scaffolding. 

B.3. Step 3: System Prompt Assembly 

The build system prompt with skill function constructs the composite system prompt by concatenating the Base Prompt (environment context, tool signatures, and data-first protocols) with the Active Skill. If a skill is retrieved, it is appended under the header: 

## ACTIVE SKILLS (Follow This Methodology!) [Skill content] 

This explicit demarcation instructs the LLM toward the retrieved procedure while retaining full access to the underlying tool library. 

B.4. Step 4: SDK Options Construction 

The build options function configures the ClaudeAgentOptions object differently for new versus resumed sessions: • New Session: Includes the fully assembled system prompt containing the injected skill. • Resumed Session: Omits the system prompt parameter and instead passes resume=self. session id . This adheres to the SDK protocol where the conversation context (including the initial skill and tool definitions) is persisted server-side. 

B.5. Step 5: Asynchronous Query Execution 

The run async coroutine orchestrates the execution loop via the Claude Agent SDK. Unlike the high-level description in Appendix A, this step handles specific SDK message types: • SDKSystemMessage : Captures the new session id for persistence. • AssistantMessage : Processes the LLM’s output blocks, including ThinkingBlock (chain-of-thought) and 

ToolUseBlock (structured command generation). • SDKResultMessage : Signals loop termination and provides usage statistics (cost and turn count). 16 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

B.6. Step 6: Session Persistence and State 

Upon loop completion, the agent preserves the session id . Generated artifacts (segmentation masks, plots) persist in the filesystem, remaining accessible for subsequent analysis. 

B.7. Step 7: Multi-Turn Interaction Pattern 

For follow-up queries, the agent detects the active session and sets is resume=True . It resumes the SDK session, inheriting the prior conversation history. This enables iterative refinement (e.g., adjusting parameters based on previous plots) without re-initializing the environment. 

B.8. Error Recovery and Robustness 

SP-Mind implements multi-layered error handling to maintain workflow stability: • Execution-Level Signaling: The SDK’s message stream includes explicit is error flags in SDKResultMessage 

objects. These signals allow the agent to distinguish between successful execution with zero results and genuine runtime failures. • Observation-Driven Recovery: Rather than relying on hardcoded retry logic, SP-Mind leverages the ReAct loop’s intrinsic adaptability. When a tool fails, the wrapper captures the full stderr trace and returns it as a textual observation. The LLM analyzes this diagnostic feedback to identify root causes (e.g., parameter constraints, missing dependencies) and attempts remediation, such as adjusting thresholds or selecting alternative algorithms, in the subsequent reasoning turn. • Transparent Runtime Fallback: To ensure execution across heterogeneous environments, tool wrappers implement automatic container detection. If the preferred runtime (e.g., Docker) is unavailable, the system transparently degrades to Apptainer or Singularity without user intervention, preventing infrastructure-level failures from halting the analytical pipeline. 

B.9. Output Formatting and Artifact Management 

SP-Mind structures outputs to support both programmatic consumption and human interpretability: • The “Research Log” Pattern: Tool wrappers are designed to return structured text summaries rather than raw exit codes. These logs aggregate execution metadata (e.g. timestamps), file manifests (paths, sizes), and validation checks (e.g., “15,432 cells identified”). This verbose observation space provides the LLM with the context necessary to verify success and hallucination-check its own outputs. • Artifact Persistence: Generated files (segmentation masks, quantification tables, diagnostic plots) are saved to the sandboxed working directory ( self.path ). Because the session context persists, these artifacts remain addressable by file path across multi-turn interactions, allowing the user to refine visualizations or request downstream analysis on previously generated data. • Structured Final Response: The system prompt directs the agent to synthesize a terminal response containing a natural language summary of biological findings, accompanied by an explicit manifest of generated files. This ensures the user receives both the analytical insight and the location of the raw data products. 

# C. SP-Bench: Comprehensive Benchmark Details 

C.1. Complete Category Taxonomy Table 

Table 4 details the complete taxonomy of the benchmark, categorized by difficulty tier. It outlines the specific stages involved in each category and the number of queries included in the benchmark dataset. 17 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis  

> Table 4. Complete Category Taxonomy Table

Tier Category Stages Involved Queries Basic 

Signal Calibration Illumination 5Image Registration Registration 5Artifact Removal Background Subtraction 5Tissue Segmentation TMA Dearray 5Probability Mapping Probability Mapping 5Cell Segmentation Segmentation 5Feature Extraction Quantification 5Phenotypic Analysis Clustering 5

Intermediate 

Pre-processing Illumination → Registration 7Core-level Segmentation TMA Dearray → Probability Mapping 7Cell Segmentation Pipeline Probability Mapping → Segmentation 7Population Profiling Quantification → Clustering 7

Advanced 

TMA Post-processing Registration → Background Sub. → TMA Dearray 7High-fidelity Segmentation Background Sub. → Prob. Mapping → Seg-mentation 7Downstream Interpretation Segmentation → Quantification → Clustering 7

Challenging 

TMA Full Pipeline Illumination → Registration → Background Sub. → TMA Dearray 4Challenging Pipeline Prob. Mapping → Segmentation → Quantifica-tion → Clustering 4Grand Pipeline All 8 stages 5

C.2. Example Queries for Basic Tasks 

Below we provide one representative example query for each of the eight basic pipeline stages. Each example demonstrates realistic natural language phrasing that a researcher might use when interacting with an agentic system. 1. Illumination 

“Generate the illumination correction profiles for the 10 cycles of raw OME-TIFF images lo-cated in /data/raw images/ . All resulting flat-field and dark-field profiles should be stored in 

/data/illumination profiles/ for use in the subsequent stitching step.” 2. Registration 

“Stitch the 10 separate raw OME-TIFF cycle files located in /data/raw cycles/ into a single multi-channel mosaic. Ensure the cycles are registered correctly and save the output to /data/registered/ .” 3. Background Subtraction 

“Perform background subtraction on the stitched OME-TIFF image located at 

/data/registered/mosaic.ome.tif to remove tissue autofluorescence. Use the channel metadata provided in /data/markers.csv and save the corrected image to 

/data/background corrected/ .” 4. TMA Dearray 

“Take the stitched TMA image located at /data/tma scan.ome.tif and dearray it into individual tissue cores. Store the resulting cropped core images and the QC map in /data/cores/ .” 5. Probability Mapping 

18 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

“Generate nuclear probability maps for the stitched whole-slide image located at 

/data/tissue scan.ome.tif . Save the resulting nuclei foreground and contour maps into 

/data/probability maps/ to facilitate downstream segmentation.” 6. Segmentation 

“Perform watershed-based segmentation on the whole-slide image located at 

/data/tissue scan.ome.tif . Use the nuclear probability maps stored in 

/data/probability maps/ to generate the final cell masks. Save all results, including nuclei and quality control outlines, to /data/segmentation/ .” 7. Quantification (Feature Extraction) 

“Perform single-cell quantification on the stitched image located at /data/tissue scan.ome.tif .Use the cell segmentation mask found at /data/segmentation/cell mask.tif and the marker names listed in /data/markers.csv . Save the resulting quantification CSV to 

/data/quantification/ .” 8. Clustering (Phenotypic Analysis) 

“Perform unsupervised clustering on the single-cell quantification data located at 

/data/quantification/cells.csv . Use the Leiden algorithm to identify distinct cell pop-ulations and also save UMAP plots and clustered data to /data/clustering/ .” 

C.3. Evaluation Criteria for Query Success 

A query is strictly marked as successful only if it satisfies all of the following nine verification criteria. This rigorous evaluation ensures that the agent not only produces the correct scientific output but also adheres to operational constraints and best practices in computational reproducibility. 1. Tool and Code Correctness: The agent must invoke the scientifically appropriate tool(s) or generate syntactically and logically correct code that directly addresses the specific demands of the task. 2. Parameter Adherence: All parameters explicitly specified in the user prompt (e.g., channel names, thresholds, algorithms) must be correctly applied. Deviations from specified parameters result in failure. 3. Sequential Ordering and Data Flow: For multi-stage queries, the agent must execute stages in the correct logical order. Furthermore, the output of one stage must be correctly passed as the input to the subsequent stage (correct intermediate data flow). 4. Output Fidelity: The generated output files (images, CSVs, plots) must functionally satisfy the query’s demand. This includes matching file formats, dimensions, data types, and containing all specific features requested by the query. In our evaluation, this was manually assessed by three bioinformatics experts, who verified that the generated outputs were biologically valid and contained sufficient information suitable to be passed to the next workflow stage. 5. Output Location Compliance: All final results must be saved exactly to the output directory specified in the prompt. Saving files to default or temporary locations without moving them to the requested path is considered a failure, as biological batch processing has complex directory structures. 6. Directory Integrity: The agent must not modify, delete, or overwrite the original input data. Additionally, the structure of the parent output directory should remain consistent, except for the creation of the requested results. 7. Execution Completion: The tool or generated code must run to completion without runtime errors, crashes, or exceeding the designated (30 min) timeout period. 8. Summary Accuracy: Upon completion, the agent must provide a natural language summary that accurately reflects the operations performed. Hallucinating steps that were not executed results in failure. 9. Error Transparency: If an error or warning is encountered during execution (even if recoverable), the agent must correctly report it to the user rather than suppressing it or claiming a false success. 19 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

C.4. Input Dataset Details 

The SP-Bench input data was curated to provide validated, realistic inputs for each pipeline stage while ensuring consistent data provenance. PRIMARY DATASET (S TAGES 1–7) The majority of SP-Bench queries (Illumination through Quantification) utilize data derived from the MCMICRO Exemplar-002 Dataset (Schapiro et al., 2022). The exemplar dataset natively provides raw inputs for the illumination and registration stages. To generate validated inputs for downstream stages (background subtraction, TMA dearray, probability mapping, segmenta-tion, and quantification), domain experts manually executed the complete MCMICRO workflow, producing ground-truth intermediate outputs at each step. CLUSTERING DATASET (S TAGE 8) For the clustering stage, we selected four cell quantification CSVs from independent spatial proteomics studies to ensure diversity in data distribution: • cHL 1 MIBI and cHL 2 MIBI 5 : Classic Hodgkin Lymphoma samples acquired via MIBI (Shaban et al., 2024). • cHL CODEX : Classic Hodgkin Lymphoma sample acquired via CODEX (Shaban et al., 2024). • PDAC IMC : Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma sample acquired via IMC (Sussman et al., 2024). To ensure computational tractability while preserving biological heterogeneity, CSVs exceeding 100 MB were subsampled using stratified random sampling that maintains equal representation across all cell clusters.   

> Figure 4. Example Input of Illumination & Registration (raw unstitched OME-TIFF)
> Figure 5. Example Input of Registration (ffp illumination profiles)

20 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis  

> Figure 6. Example Input of Background Subtraction/Dearray (stitched OME-TIFF)

# D. Cell Annotation Challenge: Evaluation Details 

This appendix provides implementation details for the Cell Annotation Challenge evaluation pipeline. 

D.1. Input Format and Data Structure 

The evaluation framework operates on two CSV files with distinct structural requirements: • Agent Output (AI CSV): Must contain at least three columns: 

– cell id : Unique identifier for each cell. 

– cluster : Cluster assignment from unsupervised clustering (inherited from input). 

– Annotation : Agent-assigned cell type label. • Ground Truth (GT CSV): Must contain at least two columns: 

– cell id : Matching cell identifiers. 

– Annotation : Ground Truth cell type label. 

D.2. Cell Matching and Cluster Aggregation 

Agents are explicitly instructed that all cells within the same input cluster must be annotated with an identical label. Therefore, the evaluation matches annotations strictly at the cluster level rather than assessing individual cells. 

D.3. Semantic Similarity Computation 

Rather than naive string matching (which would fail on synonyms like “T helper cell” vs. “CD4+ T cell”), we employ semantic similarity using the CyteOnto (Ahuja et al., 2025) framework: 

Step 1: Text Embedding. Labels from both the agent and the Ground Truth are first expanded into comprehensive biolog-ical descriptions using an Claude Sonnet 4 before embedding. Descriptions follow the official CyteOnto implementation (Ahuja et al., 2025). All unique cell type descriptions are then encoded using the Qwen3-Embedding-8B model, producing 4096-dimensional vector representations. 

Step 2: Cosine Similarity. For each cluster, we compute the cosine similarity between the agent label description embedding eai and ground truth label description embedding egt :cos (eai , egt ) = eai · egt 

∥eai ∥∥ egt ∥ (1) 21 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

Step 3: Gaussian Heat Kernel (GHK) Transform. To penalize semantic drift more aggressively, the raw cosine similarity 

Scos is transformed via a Gaussian kernel centered at 1.0: GHK (eai , egt ) = exp 



− (Scos (eai , egt ) − 1) 2

2σ2



(2) where Scos is the cosine similarity calculated in Step 2 and σ = 0 .25 controls the bandwidth. This transformation maps the similarity to the [0 , 1] range, creating a steeper penalty for deviations from exact matches compared to the linear cosine scale. 

D.4. Consistency Validation 

Before evaluation proceeds, the pipeline validates that all cells within each cluster have identical agent-assigned annotations. Submissions with intra-cluster annotation inconsistencies are rejected with detailed error reports specifying which clusters contain conflicting labels and their respective counts. 

# E. CRC-CODEX Quantification Challenge Details 

E.1. Dataset Description 

The CRC-CODEX Quantification Challenge uses 10 high-resolution tissue microarray (TMA) core images from the Colorectal Cancer CODEX dataset (Sch ¨urch et al., 2020). Each image contains multiplexed protein marker measurements across thousands of cells. The ground truth quantification was obtained from the original human-verified dataset. 

E.2. Evaluation Protocol 

Each agent was provided with the raw OME-TIFF image file and a markers CSV file specifying the channel-to-marker mapping. Agents were instructed to perform end-to-end quantification, involving: 1. Nuclear/cell segmentation. 2. Single-cell feature extraction. Each agent quantified all 10 images for 3 trials to assess consistency. Reported values are mean and standard deviations across all trials. 

E.3. Metric Definitions 

All metrics are designed to be segmentation-tolerant: they evaluate whether the agent captures the correct biological signal without requiring exact cell-to-cell correspondence (ID matching) with the ground truth segmentation. E.3.1. M ARKER ABUNDANCE CORRELATIONS 

Pearson r and Spearman ρ are computed on marker sums (total intensity per marker across all cells) to capture the total signal abundance: MarkerSum m =

> N

X

> i=1

Ii,m (3) where Ii,m is the intensity of marker m in cell i.• Pearson r: Measures linear correlation between agent and GT marker abundances. • Spearman ρ: Measures rank correlation (preserving relative high/low marker hierarchy). Both metrics range from -1 to 1, with 1 indicating perfect agreement. 22 SP-Mind: An Autonomous Reasoning Agent for Spatial Proteomics Analysis 

E.3.2. C ORRELATION MATRIX SIMILARITY 

This metric measures the preservation of marker-marker co-expression patterns (e.g., ensuring CD4 and CD3 correlate). 1. Apply arcsinh transformation (cofactor = 5 ) to all marker intensities. 2. Compute the Spearman correlation matrix for each dataset (Agent, GT). 3. Extract the upper triangle (excluding the diagonal) to avoid inflation from self-correlations. 4. Compute the cosine similarity between the flattened upper triangles: CosSim = uagent · uGT 

∥uagent ∥ · ∥ uGT ∥ (4) E.3.3. M AXIMUM MEAN DISCREPANCY (MMD) MMD measures the distance between multivariate phenotype distributions using a kernel embedding approach (Gretton et al., 2012): MMD 2 = E[k(X, X ′)] + E[k(Y, Y ′)] − 2E[k(X, Y )] (5) where k is a Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel: 

k(x, y ) = exp  −γ∥x − y∥2 (6) 

Implementation details: 

• Bandwidth selection: Median heuristic ( γ = 1 /(2 · median dist 2)) computed on a random subsample of 1,000 cells. • Input transformation: All marker intensities are arcsinh-transformed ( cf = 5 ) before computing phenotype vectors. • Estimator: Unbiased U-statistic (diagonal terms excluded). • Random seed: Fixed at 42 for reproducibility. Lower MMD indicates more similar cell population distributions. E.3.4. G RID -B ASED SPATIAL SPEARMAN CORRELATION 

This metric verifies that biological signal is localized correctly in space without requiring cell-to-cell coordinate matching: 1. Grid construction: Overlay a uniform grid (100 pixels) on the tissue image. 2. Tile aggregation: For each tile, compute the mean intensity per marker. Using the mean (rather than sum) normalizes by cell count, making the metric robust to local differences in segmentation density. 3. Correlation: Compute Spearman correlation between Agent and GT tile intensities for each marker. 4. Aggregation: Report the median correlation across all valid markers. 

ρspatial = median m

Spearman ( ¯Iagent  

> t,m

, ¯IGT 

> t,m

) (7) where ¯It,m is the mean intensity of marker m in tile t.23